---
title: GraphViz tutorial
---

GraphViz
========

This tutorial introduces you to GraphViz, a text-based diagramming tool
useful for drawing technical architecture diagrams. It’s an alternative
to hand-drawn diagrams or visual drawing packages like Inkscape or
Visio. **The key concept is that Graphs consist of nodes connected by
edges as described in an input file.** GraphViz is free software.

Showcase example
----------------

Consider an online ordering system for restaurants.

This diagram was built using GraphViz with the input file
`sysarch_example.gv`:

This was produced using the `dot` command in Bash / PowerShell (part of
the GraphViz package):

    dot -Tpdf -O sysarch_example.gv

where the `-T` option sets the output format, and `-o` sets the output
file.

Why use GraphViz
----------------

-   GraphViz will try to optimally lay out the diagram for you.

-   As a text file, the GraphViz code can be generated by hand, or
    instead by another program/script.

-   Supports a variety of output formats suitable for various uses (PDF,
    PNG, SVG etc.)

Get GraphViz
============

GraphViz can be installed on most common OSes following instructions on
<https://graphviz.org/download/>.

Windows
-------

Download the EXE installer for Windows 10 (64-bit). Run the installer,
making sure to choose the System Path for all users option. Once
installed, go to .

Mac
---

GraphViz is best installed using MacPorts or Homebrew package managers.

``` {.bash}
# installation using MacPorts
sudo port selfupdate && sudo port install graphviz
```

Once installed, go to .

Linux
-----

GraphViz is best installed using your package manager, e.g.

``` {.bash}
# ubuntu / debian / raspbian 
sudo apt update && sudo apt install graphviz

# amazon linux / centos
sudo yum update && sudo yum install graphviz
```

Once installed, go to .

Online version
--------------

An online version of GraphViz can be found at [this
link](https://www.google.com/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=&ved=2ahUKEwiZk5yCl6vvAhXOUhUIHd7XA3wQFjAAegQIBBAD&url=https%3A%2F%2Fdreampuf.github.io%2FGraphvizOnline%2F&usg=AOvVaw2Sw6OnaIb_oZkOtu44VcNz).
It will understand all the normal GraphViz code, but usage is different
to the command-line versions.

Test your installation {#sec:test-your-installation}
----------------------

Open a new PowerShell / terminal window. Type . If GraphViz is installed
correctly you should see a help message.

Walkthrough
===========

GraphViz is a command-line software package. It has a number of
commands, but we will focus on `dot` which is used for most diagrams. We
will try to draw the diagram in .

Input file
----------

Use a text editor to write the following content into a text file:
GraphViz files normally have the extension `.gv` although it can be any
extension.

Command
-------

We will use the `dot` command to convert our diagram into the required
image format.

``` {.bash}
# change directory to correct one first!

# PDF output (good for printing)
dot -Tpdf -o walkthrough.pdf walkthrough.gv

# PNG output (good for inclusion MS office-type apps)
dot -Tpng -o walkthrough.png walkthrough.gv

# SVG output (scales well for the web)
dot -Tsvg -o walkthrough.svg walkthrough.gv

# etc
```

Key points
----------

-   Lines must be terminated with semi-colon.

-   Graph must (normally) start with `digraph` usually with the name
    `G`.

-   Nodes can have a label associated with them. If no label is given
    then the node name is used instead.

-   Nodes can be used in a connection (e.g. `A -> B`) without
    “declaring” them first. I recommend doing so as you will probably
    need to specify labels.

-   The appearance of nodes and edges can be changed by other
    attributes, as described in the [GraphViz Node, Edge and Graph
    Attributes page](https://graphviz.org/doc/info/attrs.html).

-   The `rankdir=LR` just flips the graph 90 degrees. Try removing it
    and recompiling to see the difference.

Grouping elements
-----------------

Elements can be grouped by putting them in a subgraph named starting
with `cluster_`.

which gives:
