---
title: Lambda integration
---

We have met simple lambda functions. This week we will see how Lambda
integrates to provide custom logic within an otherwise PaaS workflow.

Events
======

Lambda functions are *invoked* in response to *events*. The *payload* is
passed to the named *handler* in your code.

Event sources
-------------

Events can be generated:

Directly

:   from CLI `aws lambda invoke` or web console.

From applications

:   that incorporate the AWS SDK:

    -   May be running on local client PC, mobile device, onsite or
        co-lo server or EC2 instances.

From other AWS components

:   such as SNS, S3, other lambda functions.

    -   In most cases, AWS components invoke a named lambda function
        when a specified event happens (e.g. S3 events)

Event source mapping

:   to invoke lambda functions from SQS or other sources (streams) that
    don’t themselves invoke lambda functions directly.

    -   Sources include DynamoDB and SQS. Also Kinesis, MQ, Kafka.

As a web API

:   using API Gateway. This can be used to:

    -   Provide an API for web app, mobile app or other tool that
        doesn’t require AWS login.

    -   Serve a web application directly from AWS Lambda. Suits some web
        frameworks, not others.

Event formats
-------------

All events are passed into Lambda as JSON documents, which are converted
to the native map type of the code (if possible):

-   Events generated by AWS components have a fixed JSON format,
    described in the developer documentation for the relevant
    AWS component.

-   Events generated by components you provide yourself (e.g. payload on
    CLI, or via your own application) can have whatever format you like,
    as long as it’s JSON encoded.

Invocation types
----------------

Synchronous

:   where the lambda function is invoked. We then wait for the handler
    to return its output before continuing.

Asynchronous

:   where we ask lambda to invoke the function and return immediately.
    The handler runs soon thereafter.

Output
======

Lambda functions have a number of possible ways to provide output:

Standard output

:   using Python , PowerShell , Java or similar. Output will get
    directed to CloudWatch logs and is generally useful only for
    debugging or capturing data for later analysis.

Return value

:   from the handler function.

    -   Only makes sense when the function is invoked *synchronously*.

Side effects

:   calling other AWS services, APIs etc.

Execution role
==============

A lambda function assumes an execution role when running. Like all
roles, an execution rule is managed by another component known as
Identity Access Management (IAM). An execution role may be used for
multiple lambda functions.

Every lambda execution role’s trust policy must let Lambda assume the
role. We can use same policy as last week:

Role can have custom policies attached. Alternatively we can attach a
*managed policy* from an AWS-managed library. Can greatly simplify
execution role management.

The role must contain the necessary permissions for the actions the
function wants to perform on other AWS components.

Event source mapping
====================
